Update Baremetal OS installation with new API route (#7024)
ovh/docs: pages/bare_metal_cloud/dedicated_servers/partitioning_ovh/guide.en-gb.md

## Instructions

During the default OS installation, the user is interactively prompted by the OS installer (provided by the software editor) to specify on which disks the Operating System will be installed, the partitioning layout, etc. Once the OS is installed, it is possible to change the partitioning layout but it can be very tricky and risky, especially for partitions that are currently used by the system. For that reason, storage is a very important subject that needs to be considered **before** installing an Operating System.

Apart from the simplicity offered by an API, the main advantage is the possibility to fully customize the disks and partitions on which the OS will be installed.

> In this page we are focusing only on the `storage` sub-hash of the API call used to reinstall an OS on a dedicated server. For other customizations not related to storage, please See [OVHcloud API and Storage](/pages/bare_metal_cloud/dedicated_servers/partitioning_ovh) for more details.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this page we are focusing only on the `storage` sub-hash of the API call used to reinstall an OS on a dedicated server. For other customizations not related to storage, please read [OVHcloud API and Storage](/pages/bare_metal_cloud/dedicated_servers/partitioning_ovh) for more details.
```

        "value": 480
      },
      "description": "2 X Disk SSD 480 GB, JBOD",
      "raidController": null
    },
    {
      "defaultHardwareRaidType": null,
      "numberOfDisks": 2,
      "diskGroupId": 2,
      "diskType": "NVME",
      "defaultHardwareRaidSize": null,
      "diskSize": {
        "unit": "GB",
        "value": 1920
      },
      "raidController": null,
      "description": "2 X Disk NVME 1920 GB, JBOD"
    }
  ],
  "processorArchitecture": "x86_64",
  "coresPerProcessor": 64,
  "processorName": "Epyc7763",
  "formFactor": "1u",
  "motherboard": "S8036-M",
  "numberOfProcessors": 1,
  "usbKeys": null
}
```

In this example, there are 2 disk groups:

- the first one (diskGroupId=1) contains 2 x 480 GB disks.
- the second one (diskGroupId=2) contains 2 x 1,9 TB disks.

Example of Debian 12 (Bookworm) OS installation on the diskGroup 2:

> [!api]
>
> @api {v1} /dedicated/server POST /dedicated/server/{serviceName}/reinstall
>

```json
{
    "operatingSystem": "debian12_64",
    "storage": [
        {
            "diskGroupId": 2
        }
    ]
}
```

> [!primary]
>
> By default, the OS will be installed on diskGroupId 1.
>

<br />

> [!warning]
>

> > For the moment API only supports OS installation and storage customization on 1 single disk group. From 1 up to all disks of the selected disk group can be involved in the storage customization. Nevertheless, other disks of the disk group will be erased but still visible in the freshly new installed OS and can be used/configured afterward for data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> For the moment API only supports OS installation and storage customization on 1 single disk group. From 1 up to all disks of the selected disk group can be involved in the storage customization. Nevertheless, other disks of the disk group will be erased but  they will still be visible in the freshly new installed OS and can be used/configured afterward for data.
```

Author: ```suggestion
> For the moment API only supports OS installation and storage customization on 1 single disk group. From 1 up to all disks of the selected disk group can be involved in the storage customization. Nevertheless, other disks of the disk group will be erased but they will still be visible in the freshly new installed OS and can be used/configured afterward for data.
```

Author: (same suggestion, just to fix a duplicated space)

>

### Hardware RAID <a name="hard-raid"></a>

This section is only applicable to servers having at least a hardware RAID controller in one of their [disk group](#disk-group).

#### Server & Hardware RAID Compatibility

> You can have this information by using the following API call:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can get this information by using the following API call:
```

> [!api]
>
> @api {v1} /dedicated/server GET /dedicated/server/{serviceName}/install/hardwareRaidProfile
>

If your server doesn't have any hardware RAID controller, it will return a HTTP 403 (Forbidden) with the following message:

```json
{
  "message": "Hardware RAID is not supported by this server"
}
```

Example of reply for a server with a hardware RAID controller.

```json
{
  "controllers": [
    {
      "type": "mega",
      "disks": [
        {
          "names": [
            "c0:d0",
            "c0:d1",
            "c0:d2"
          ],
          "type": "SSD",
          "capacity": {
            "unit": "GB",
            "value": 960
          },
          "speed": {
            "value": "6g",
            "unit": "GB/s"
          }
        }
      ],
      "model": "9361-8i-2G"
    }
  ]
}
```

> [!primary]
>

> > You can also have this information by looking at the `raidController` attribute value in API call described in [disk group](#disk-group) section.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> You can also get this information by looking at the `raidController` attribute value from the API call described in the [disk group](#disk-group) section.
```

>

#### API & Hardware RAID

> [!warning]
>

> > For the moment API only supports hardware RAID customization for 1 single hardware RAID controller. If you server has multiple hardware RAID controllers on which you want to customize their configuration, you can configure the hardware RAID controller(s) other than the one in the disk group targeted for OS installation **before** the OS reinstallation (you can also do it once OS reinstallation finished, but we recommend you to do it **before** in order to avoid risk of wrong manipulation that could lead to data loss).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> For the moment API only supports hardware RAID customization for 1 single hardware RAID controller. If your server has multiple hardware RAID controllers on which you want to customize their configuration, you can configure the other hardware RAID controller(s) than the one in the disk group targeted for OS installation **before** the OS re installation (you can also do it once OS re installation is finished, but we recommend you to do it **before** in order to avoid any risk of wrong manipulation that could lead to data loss).
```

>

Now let's suppose you have a dedicated server with 1 disk group attached to the RAID controller and 12 disks in that disk group. Example with a hardware RAID 10:

```json
{
    "operatingSystem": "debian12_64",
    "storage": [
        {
            "hardwareRaid": [
                {
                    "raidLevel": 10,
                    "arrays": 4
                }
            ]
        }
    ]
}
```

In this example: all the 12 disks will be involved in a hardware RAID of level 10. There will be 4 groups of 3 disks, meaning 4 RAID 1 across 3 disks and the 4 groups will be in RAID 0.

> [!primary]
>
> Hardware RAID is at a layer that is not visible by the OS. All OSes are "compatible" with hardware RAID.
>

All disks involved in a hardware RAID configuration will be seen as 1 single virtual disk by the OS.

This basically means that if you have involved all disks of the target disk group in a hardware RAID configuration, configuring a software RAID on top of it will not be applicable since the OS will see 1 single virtual disk.

### Partitioning <a name="partitioning"></a>

> When we talk about partitioning layout, we are talking about how your data will be organized and seen by the OS, i.e everything that comes on top of your physical disks (or virtual disk if you have configured hardware RAID), up to the filesystem that is mounted: from lowest to highest layers:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Partitioning layout is about how your data will be organized and seen by the OS, i.e everything that comes on top of your physical disks (or virtual disk if you have configured hardware RAID), up to the filesystem that is mounted, from the lowest to the highest layer:
```

- disk (physical/virtual disk, PD),
- partition (physical partition, PP),
- ZFS: vdev (zgroup, ZG), zpool (ZP), ZFS dataset (ZD), ZFS volume (ZV),
- [software RAID](/pages/bare_metal_cloud/dedicated_servers/raid_soft) (SR),
- LVM: physical volume (PV), volume group (VG), logical volume (LV),
- filesystem with a mountpoint (FS)

The following table provides an overview of the different partitioning components and how these layers interact with each other:

![Partitioning Layers Table](images/partitioning-layers-table.png){.thumbnail}

> [!primary]
>
> In the table above, `/dev/zd1` represents a ZFS volume (also known as `zvol`). This is a virtual disk on top of ZFS dataset (ZD) and a zpool (ZP), that is seen as a normal physical disk (PD) by the Operating System. This feature is not available on the OVHcloud API and we do not plan on implementing it.
>

#### OS & Partitioning Compatibility <a name="os-partitioning-compatibility"></a>

> Since partitioning configuration will be visible by the OS, OS chosen for installation has an impact on the possibilities you have in your partitioning customization.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Since partitioning configuration will be visible by the OS, the chosen OS for installation has an impact on the possibilities you have in your partitioning customization.
```

Example:

```json
{
    "templateName": "debian11_64",
    "filesystems": [
        "ext3",
        "ext4",
        "swap",
        "xfs"
    ],
    ...
    "lvmReady": true,
    "noPartitioning": false,
    "softRaidOnlyMirroring": false
}
```

|Attribute|Description|
|---|---|
|filesystems|File system types compatible with this operating system|
|lvmReady|Whether this operating system is compatible with LVM or not|
|noPartitioning|When true, operating system doesn't support custom partitioning|
|softRaidOnlyMirroring|When true, operating system partially supports custom partitioning (only software RAID levels 0 and 1 can be configured and assigned to the 2 first disks of the disk group)|

The following API call can be used to list the different operating system partitioning scheme names. Most operating systems support custom partitioning configuration and therefore only have one single scheme named `default`. Only few of them that don't support custom partitioning configuration (`noPartitioning` set to `true`) and **can** therefore have multiple schemes.

> [!api]
>
> @api {v1} /dedicated/installationTemplate GET  /dedicated/installationTemplate/{templateName}/partitionScheme
>

> The following API calls can be used to know what partitioning will be applied by default, if not customized or not customize-able by OS.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following API calls can be used to know which partitioning will be applied by default, if not customized or not customizable by OS.
```

> [!api]
>
> @api {v1} /dedicated/installationTemplate GET /dedicated/installationTemplate/{templateName}/partitionScheme/{schemeName}/partition

> > @api {v1} /dedicated/installationTemplate GET /dedicated/installationTemplate/{templateName}/partitionScheme/{schemeName}/partition/{mountpoint}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
>

> [!api]
> @api {v1} /dedicated/installationTemplate GET /dedicated/installationTemplate/{templateName}/partitionScheme/{schemeName}/partition/{mountpoint}
```
Not sure stacking 2 API calls into a single `[!api]` format would work.

¹ See the [ZFS vdevs vs standard RAID](#raidz2RAID) table for more details.<br />
² The RAID level for swap can only be set to 1 within the [OVHcloud API](https://api.ovh.com/). In reality, the swap partitions will not use RAID. When a swap partition with size `s` is defined on a server with `n` disks, this will create `n` partitions of size `s` on every disk without any software RAID device underneath.<br />
³ Windows native RAID (the one configured by the OVHcloud installer) supports RAID 1 but only between two disks while other implementations allow for more than two.<br />

> ⁴ The ESXi installer does not support custom partitioning schemes. Partitioning is defined by the software publisher. Nevertheless, the [OVHcloud API](https://api.ovh.com/) can give you an idea of what the partitioning looks like: see [OS Details informations](#os-partitioning-compatibility) for more details.<br />

Reviewer: ```suggestion
⁴ The ESXi installer does not support custom partitioning schemes. Partitioning is defined by the software publisher. Nevertheless, the [OVHcloud API](https://api.ovh.com/) can give you an idea of what the partitioning looks like: see [OS Details information](#os-partitioning-compatibility) for more details.<br />
```

Author: ```suggestion
⁴ The ESXi installer does not support custom partitioning schemes. Partitioning is defined by the software publisher. Nevertheless, the [OVHcloud API](https://api.ovh.com/) can give you an idea of what the partitioning looks like: see [OS & Partitioning Compatibility](#os-partitioning-compatibility) for more details.<br />
```

> [!warning]
>

> > This table is only provided for information purposes. Please note that LVM and especially filesystem compatibility also depend on the OS (OVHcloud template) being installed. See [OS Details informations](#os-partitioning-compatibility) for more details.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> This table is only provided for information purposes. Please note that LVM and especially filesystem compatibility also depend on the OS (OVHcloud template) being installed. See [OS Details information](#os-partitioning-compatibility) for more details.
```

Author: ```suggestion
> This table is only provided for information purposes. Please note that LVM and especially filesystem compatibility also depend on the OS (OVHcloud template) being installed. See [OS & Partitioning Compatibility](#os-partitioning-compatibility) for more details.
```

|RAID 7|raidz3|4|3|7|
|RAID 10|❌|4|0|4|

#### API & Partitioning

Example of OS installation with a custom partitioning layout:

> [!api]
>
> @api {v1} /dedicated/server POST /dedicated/server/{serviceName}/reinstall
>

```json
{
    "operatingSystem": "debian12_64",
    "storage": [
        {
            "partitioning": {
                "disks": 2,
                "layout": [
                    {
                        "fileSystem": "ext4",
                        "mountPoint": "/boot",
                        "size": 1000,
                        "raidLevel": 0
                    },
                    {
                        "fileSystem": "ext4",
                        "mountPoint": "/",
                        "size": 0
                    }
                ]
            }
        }
    ]
}
```

`size` 0 means that the partition will fill all the remaining space on the involved disks.

> [!primary]
>
> Up to 1 partition can be configured to fill the disk (size 0).
>

> <br />

Reviewer: Not really needed here

Author: Not sure where this is exactly, but after checking locally, `<br />` between 2 primary/warning stuffs is mandatory to prevent issue that will cut the logo of the second one...

> [!primary]
>

> > If not specified `raidLevel` will be set to 1.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> If not specified, `raidLevel` will be set to 1.
```

>

In this example, only the 2 first disks of the disk group will be involved in the partitioning (ie. in the software RAID).

> [!primary]
>

> > `disks` parameter can be omitted if you want to involved all the disks of the disk group in the software RAID.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> The `disks` parameter can be omitted if you want to involve all the disks of the disk group in the software RAID.
```

>

As you can see, a partitioning layout is a list of partitions. Here is an example of a partition structure:

```json
{
    "mountPoint": "/var/lib/vz",
    "fileSystem": "ext4",
    "size": 0,
    "raidLevel": "1",
    "extras": {
        "lv": {
            "name": "data"
        }
    }
}
```

> `extras` sub-hash is optional. For the moment it can only be used to specify that the partition will be a logical volume and its logical volume. It can also be used for ZFS:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `extras` sub-hash is optional. For the moment it can only be used to specify that the partition will be a logical volume and its logical volume. It can also be used for ZFS:
```
"a logical volume and its logical volume" : is this intended?

```json
{
    "mountPoint": "/",
    "fileSystem": "zfs",
    "size": 0,
    "raidLevel": "5",
    "extras": {
        "zp": {
            "name": "poule"
        }
    }
}
```

In this example, the `/` mount point will target a ZFS dataset in a zpool named "poule" in a raidz1. Please check [ZFS vdevs vs standard RAID](#raidz2RAID) to get the matching between raidz and standard RAID levels.

> [!primary]
>
> If not specified, a custom zpool name will be automatically generated.
>

<br />

> [!primary]
>
> You can exploit the custom zpool name value to:
>
> - group datasets with same raid levels: use the same zpool name

> > - force datasets with same raid levels to be in distinct zpool: use different zpool names.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> - force datasets with same raid levels to be in distinct zpools, using different zpool names.
```

|`Debian` does not provide a precompiled `ZFS` module and this server does not have enough memory to compile it. Please use a different file system|We always try to find the best balance between integration in OVHcloud ecosystem, hardware compatibility and reduced OS image size while providing an image that is as similar as possible as the official cloud-ready image provided by the software editor. `ZFS` module is not natively provided by the software editor, we don't want to make the image heavier for customer not needing `ZFS` and we want to offer a `ZFS`-ready OS with configured `ZFS` partitioning for customers who want it. Therefore `ZFS` module is compiled and installed during the OS installation only for customers who ask for it. Since compilation requires memory in addition to that already used to run the rescue OS in memory, we have set the threshold at 8GiB to guarantee smooth operation and customer experience|- Remove all `ZFS` partitions or change their filesystems to something different than `ZFS`<br />- Choose another OS that natively supports `ZFS` filesystem such as Proxmox<br />- Use a server with 8GiB memory or more|

#### Input customer auto-fixing

> In order to improve customer experience, reduce OVHcloud support workload and to avoid introducing breaking changes for customer, some customer input is automatically fixed or changed by the backend. The following table gives an overview of what is currently auto-fixed/changed:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In order to improve customer experience, reduce OVHcloud support workload and to avoid introducing breaking changes for customers, some customer input is automatically fixed or changed by the backend. The following table gives an overview of what is currently auto-fixed/changed:
```
